Annual Review of Psychology
Stress and Health: A Review of
Psychobiological Processes
Daryl B. O’Connor,1 Julian F. Thayer,2
and Kavita Vedhara3
1School of Psychology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom;
email: d.b.oconnor@leeds.ac.uk
2Department of Psychological Science, School of Social Ecology, University of California,
Irvine, California 92697, USA; email: jfthayer@uci.edu
3Division of Primary Care, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham NG7 2UH, United Kingdom; email: kavita.vedhara@nottingham.ac.uk
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2021. 72:663–88
First published as a Review in Advance on
September 4, 2020
The Annual Review of Psychology is online at
psych.annualreviews.org
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-062520-
122331
Copyright © 2021 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved
Keywords
allostatic load, cortisol, autonomic nervous system, genomics, HPA axis
Abstract
The cumulative science linking stress to negative health outcomes is vast.
Stress can affect health directly, through autonomic and neuroendocrine responses, but also indirectly, through changes in health behaviors. In this
review, we present a brief overview of (a) why we should be interested in
stress in the context of health; (b) the stress response and allostatic load;
(c) some of the key biological mechanisms through which stress impacts
health, such as by influencing hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis regulation and cortisol dynamics, the autonomic nervous system, and gene expression; and (d) evidence of the clinical relevance of stress, exemplified through
the risk of infectious diseases. The studies reviewed in this article confirm
that stress has an impact on multiple biological systems. Future work ought
to consider further the importance of early-life adversity and continue to
explore how different biological systems interact in the context of stress and
health processes.
663
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
Contents
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 664
WHY SHOULD WE BE INTERESTED IN STRESS? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 665
Stress and Health: The Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 666
The Stress Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 666
KEY BIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS THROUGH WHICH STRESS
IMPACTS HEALTH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 667
Effects of Stress on HPA Axis Regulation and Cortisol Dynamics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 667
Cortisol Responses to Stress and Future Health Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 667
Stress, Cortisol Awakening Response, and Health Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 669
Stress, the Diurnal Cortisol Slope, and Health Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 670
Stress and Hair Cortisol. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 671
Effects of Stress on Autonomic Nervous System Regulation and Dynamics . . . . . . . . 671
Effects of Stress on Blood Pressure, Heart Rate, Heart Rate Variability,
and Their Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 672
The Role of Social Genomics in Elucidating the Relationship Between Stress
and Health. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 674
Stress Results Not in the Downregulation but in the Dysregulation
of Immunity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 674
Enhancing Our Understanding of the Role Played by Cortisol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 675
Interventions and Gene Expression: A Promising Area of Enquiry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 675
THE CLINICAL RELEVANCE OF STRESS: THE CASE
OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 676
The Obstacles Inherent in Examining the Clinical Relevance of Stress . . . . . . . . . . . . . 676
Viral Challenge Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 677
Vaccine Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 679
So, Does It Matter? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 680
THE IMPORTANCE OF EARLY-LIFE ADVERSITY FOR STRESS
AND HEALTH PROCESSES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 680
CONCLUSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 681
INTRODUCTION
On the 18th of May 1936, Hans Seyle published a 595-word letter in Nature entitled “A syndrome
produced by diverse nocuous agents” (Selye 1936). This landmark document described what would
later become known as the general adaptation syndrome, which would be the subject of an early
Annual Review of Medicine paper (Selye 1951) and of an influential “sketch” by Selye (1950, p. 1383)
in which he argued that “anything that causes stress endangers life, unless it is met by adequate
adaptive responses; conversely, anything that endangers life causes stress and adaptive responses.
Adaptability and resistance to stress are fundamental prerequisites for life, and every vital organ
and function participates in them.” In the intervening 70 years, Selye’s early work has triggered
a gargantuan scientific effort aimed at understanding adaptability, resistance, and ultimately the
pathways through which stress influences health, disease, and longevity.
This review is not intended to provide a comprehensive overview of the enormous scientific
literature investigating how large or small, acute or chronic, historical or recent, laboratory-based
or naturalistic stressful events lead to ill-health, disease, and reduced life expectancy. Instead, we
664 O’Connor • Thayer • Vedhara
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
Allostatic load:
wear and tear the body
experiences due to
repeated stress
exposure
aim to present a brief overview of (a) why we should be interested in stress in the context of health,
(b) how and through which mechanisms stress affects health, and (c) why it matters, that is, what
the evidence tells us about the relation between stress and clinically meaningful changes in our
health. Finally, we consider an important area of research that looks at the health consequences
of previous stressful experiences in the form of early-life adversity. Along the way, we highlight
exciting new developments and unanswered questions and point to promising future directions
for research.
WHY SHOULD WE BE INTERESTED IN STRESS?
Stress is now part of our everyday vernacular and is central to the human condition. Scientific
interest in stress dates back at least to World War I, when soldiers were found to exhibit shellshock, an extreme reaction to the trauma of battle that was subsequently acknowledged to be a
manifestation of post-traumatic stress disorder (Lazarus 1999). The increase in media coverage
over many decades has corresponded with an exponential growth in research and public awareness of stress and its effects. In many countries around the world, stress is recognized as a leading cause of long-term sickness, accounting for millions of working days lost (e.g., Am. Psychol.
Assoc. 2019, UK Health Saf. Executive 2019). Stress is the focus of bestselling books, front covers
of Time magazine, and the subject of novels, plays, and movies. We are interested in stress because
it is everywhere. It impacts everyone and pervades all aspects of our lives. Moreover, it is now well
established that stress can affect health directly, through autonomic and neuroendocrine responses
(the subject of the current review), but also indirectly, through changes to health behaviors (e.g.,
Hill et al. 2018, O’Connor et al. 2008, Tomiyama 2019). In the latter case, stress may indirectly
contribute to obesity, cardiovascular disease, and cancer risk to the extent that it produces deleterious changes in diet and/or helps maintain unhealthy eating behaviors such as high fat intake or
low fiber or fruit/vegetable intake.
Nevertheless, the usefulness of the concept of stress has recently been called into question.
Kagan (2016) argued that the overly permissive use of classifying any event as a stressor just because it leads to biological or behavioral change limits its utility. Instead, he argues that the concept of stress should only be applied to events that ultimately pose a serious threat to an organism’s
well-being. Leading theorists and stress researchers have challenged this view. One group has argued that the concept of stress is useful as long as it is understood in biological terms within a
broader framework of allostasis and allostatic load, adaptation to positive and negative life experiences, and resultant health behaviors (McEwen & McEwen 2016). Another group of researchers
has made a convincing case for the utility of stress as a valuable heuristic that has allowed researchers to integrate different traditions in the study of stress—epidemiological, psychological,
and biological—into a stage model of stress and disease (Cohen et al. 2016). In an earlier article,
Segerstrom & O’Connor (2012) have argued that the concept of stress has a long and productive
history but also has its detractors, who point out the imprecise and simplistic use of the term.
For example, stress can be located in the environment (e.g., a noxious stimulus in one’s environment), in appraisal (e.g., the extent to which a threatening encounter is appraised as stressful), or in
response (e.g., the emotional or physiological response to a stressor); therefore, careful conceptualization and assessment are needed to differentiate among these locales and to reveal interactions
among them. Indeed, these issues are echoed by Slavich (2019), who introduced the notion of
stressnology to describe the problematic and primitive approach to studying the effects of life
stress exposure on human health and called for better measurement and use of state-of-the-art
instruments. Notwithstanding these issues, we contend that the cumulative science linking stress
to negative health outcomes is robust. Indeed, the fact that these relationships are evident, even
www.annualreviews.org • Stress and Health 665
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
Cortisol:
the stress hormone
ANS: autonomic
nervous system
HPA axis:
hypothalamic–
pituitary–adrenal
axis
SAM system:
sympathetic–adrenal–
medullary
system
in the face of concerns regarding imprecision in the conceptualization and measurement of stress,
attests to the importance of stress for health.
Stress and Health: The Basics
In order to survive, the human body is required to continually adapt to the changing internal and
external environment. At its most basic level this is known as homeostasis, whereby the human
body tightly regulates its internal physiological states (e.g., body temperature, oxygen supply etc.)
to keep us alive. In order to maintain homeostasis, our body releases hormones (e.g., cortisol,
adrenaline, and noradrenaline) and switches on the autonomic nervous system (ANS) and the
central nervous system to allow us to adapt and respond to day-to-day activities (some of which
may be stressful). The release of these so-called physiological mediators (cortisol, adrenaline, and
noradrenaline) and changes in immune and metabolic parameters (known as allostasis; see Sterling
& Eyer 1988) are protective and adaptive as long as they switch on and switch off in a balanced
way when an environmental challenge or stressor is no longer present. However, when this fails
to happen and the physiological response is maintained overtime, it can become damaging for our
health and well-being.
McEwen (1998) proposed the concept of allostatic load to refer to the wear and tear that the
body experiences due to repeated and long-term exposure to stress. Moreover, he suggested that
allostatic load is characterized by the inefficient switching on and turning off of what he called
stress mediators and, in some cases, to the failure of those mediators to mount an adequate response when required (e.g., if the body releases too little or too much cortisol when faced with an
acutely stressful encounter). More broadly, McEwen (1998) proposed that the long-term impact
of exposure to stress affects the body at the cardiovascular, metabolic, neural, behavioral, and cellular levels and increases the risk of developing disease because the bodily systems stop working
effectively (see McEwen & Seeman 1999). Most recently, McEwen (2018) has discussed the concept of allostatic overload, which describes the harmful effects of stress on our biological systems
when a host of stress mediators are released to help us adapt but their excessive, prolonged, and
repeated overuse and dysregulation can ultimately lead to damage. At its core, allostatic overload
reinforces the notion that stress affects multiple biological systems and that these systems interact
with one another to adapt and respond to changing environmental demands that are perceived as
stressful.
The Stress Response
Broadly speaking, two systems are activated when we experience stress. The first and easiest to
activate is the sympathetic–adrenal–medullary (SAM) system. The second is the hypothalamic–
pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis.When an individual is suddenly under threat or frightened, the brain
(the amygdala, then the hypothalamus) instantly activates the ANS to send a message to the adrenal
glands to trigger the release of noradrenaline, which in turn activates the internal organs. This is
the basic ANS sympathetic response to threat. However, at the same time, the adrenal medulla
releases adrenaline, which is rapidly transported through the bloodstream to further prepare the
body to respond. This system is known as the SAM system response. Within seconds adrenaline
and noradrenaline have the entire body on alert, the so-called fight-or-flight response. As a result,
breathing quickens, the heart beats more rapidly and powerfully, the eyes dilate to allow more light
in, and the activity of the digestive system decreases to permit more blood to go to the muscles.
This effect is both rapid and intense.
In addition to the SAM response, when an individual experiences an event in their environment
that they perceive as stressful, the hypothalamus releases a peptide hormone called corticotrophin
666 O’Connor • Thayer • Vedhara
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
BP: blood pressure
HRV:
heart rate variability
Gene expression:
the process by which
genes are switched on
or become active
releasing factor (CRF). Once released, CRF is transported in the blood supply to the pituitary
gland, where it stimulates the release of adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH). Subsequently,
ACTH travels through the circulatory system to the adrenal cortex, where it stimulates production of the glucocorticoid cortisol, the so-called stress hormone. One of the central functions of
cortisol is to increase access to energy stores, increase protein and fat mobilization, and decrease
inflammation. Therefore, when an individual experiences stress, the surge in cortisol triggers the
release of excess energy stored in the muscle and liver as glycogen, which is then broken down into
glucose ready for utilization by the muscles and the brain. However, it is important to bear in mind
that cortisol is a complex hormone and has multiple roles beyond the stress response (McEwen
2019). As discussed below, cortisol plays a key role in regulating circadian rhythm by influencing
genomic and nongenomic cellular and molecular mechanisms.
KEY BIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS THROUGH WHICH STRESS
IMPACTS HEALTH
Following Selye’s groundbreaking work, many researchers have attempted to investigate the effects of repeated and long-term stress exposure on physical health outcomes (as well as on mental
health outcomes), and we consider some of this evidence later. At the same time, however, there
has also been considerable interest in the key biological mechanisms that mediate the stress–health
relationship. For example, what are the causal pathways that link stress to health outcomes such
as increased risk of disease onset, faster disease progression, or reduced longevity? Which important biological processes does stress impact before it affects health outcomes? How does stress
influence the expression of genes that might have an impact on health? As indicated earlier, the
current review cannot possibly summarize all of the accumulated evidence; instead, we focus on
three important areas of research that have been influential in improving our understanding of
how stress influences health: (a) research investigating the effects of stress on the regulation of the
HPA axis and the dynamics of cortisol; (b) work examining the influence of stress on the ANS, especially blood pressure (BP) and heart rate variability (HRV); and (c) exciting recent developments
in social genomics showing that gene expression can be influenced by environmental factors such
as stress.
Effects of Stress on HPA Axis Regulation and Cortisol Dynamics
Cortisol is the primary effector hormone of the HPA axis stress response system. Like other aspects of the endocrine system, the HPA axis is regulated by a negative feedback system, whereby
the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland have receptors that detect changes in cortisol levels—
for example, cortisol secretion is inhibited when circulating levels rise and is stimulated when
levels fall. However, if the HPA axis is repeatedly activated, this triggers increased cortisol output, thereby exposing bodily tissues to excessive concentrations of the hormone (Lovallo 2016;
McEwen 1998, 2000; Miller et al. 2007). Over time, such repetitive activation may lead to tissue
damage and contribute to future ill-health by placing excessive pressure on various bodily systems,
including the HPA axis (i.e., allostatic load and overload) (McEwen 1998).
Cortisol Responses to Stress and Future Health Risk
A considerable body of research has explored whether individuals who exhibit exaggerated cortisol responses to stress are at increased risk of future ill-health (Bunea et al. 2017, Dickerson &
Kemeny 2004, Lovallo 2016, Newman et al. 2007, Zorn et al. 2017). This work has been heavily
www.annualreviews.org • Stress and Health 667
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
influenced by what is known as the reactivity hypothesis, first applied to examining cardiovascular
reactivity to stress (Obrist 1981) and discussed below, which emphasizes that individuals who exhibit the largest increases in BP or heart rate (HR) in response to acute stressors will be at greatest
risk of future ill-health. In the context of cortisol reactivity, a number of important studies have
found evidence that increased cortisol reactivity to stress is associated with negative health outcomes (e.g., al’Absi & Wittmers 2003; Hamer & Steptoe 2012; Hamer et al. 2010, 2012). For
example, al’Absi & Wittmers (2003) found evidence that enhanced HPA activity in response to an
acute stressor was (cross-sectionally) associated with risk of hypertension. Similarly, Hamer et al.
(2010), in another cross-sectional investigation, found that heightened reactivity to a stressor was
associated with coronary artery calcification (a marker of subclinical coronary atherosclerosis). In
a 3-year prospective study of the Whitehall II cohort, Hamer & Steptoe (2012) found a 59% increase in the odds of incident hypertension per standard deviation change in cortisol responsivity
to a stressor. In a separate analysis of the same cohort, this group showed that heightened cortisol
reactivity to stress was also associated with progression of coronary artery calcification 3 years
later (Hamer et al. 2012). Interestingly, these authors noted considerable variation in the cortisol stress responses, with only 40% of participants exhibiting at least 1 mmol/L increase. What
about the other 60%? In an exciting development relating to cellular aging, Steptoe et al. (2017)
recently found that healthy men and women who were “cortisol responders” to acute stressors had
shorter telomeres 3 years later compared to those who were “nonresponders.” These authors argued that cortisol responsivity may mediate, in part, the relationship between psychological stress
and cellular aging.
Alongside the work on heightened cortisol reactivity, research has emerged to suggest that
smaller increases or blunted cortisol responses to stress may also be indicative of current ill-health
or future health risks (Lovallo 2016). Early evidence to suggest that lower cortisol responses to
stress are not necessarily protective came from a study of patients who were alcohol dependent
and polysubstance abusers. Lovallo et al. (2000) found that control patients exhibited the expected
cortisol increase following a speech stress test, whereas patients who were diagnosed as alcohol
dependent or alcohol and stimulant dependent did not exhibit a significant cortisol increase. These
findings indicated that hyporesponsivesness (also known as a blunted response) may also be a
marker of dysregulation of HPA axis functioning.
Surprisingly, over the past 20 years, the health effects of low cortisol and/or blunted cortisol
reactivity to stress have received less attention. However, findings from the Dutch Famine Birth
Cohort Study have been very influential for our understanding not only of the cortisol reactivity
hypothesis but also of the cardiovascular reactivity hypothesis (as outlined below). This cohort
study is a large population-based investigation of people who were born in Amsterdam between
1943 and 1947, with a subsample of participants who completed an extensive stress protocol between 2002 and 2004 (Roseboom et al. 2006). In terms of cortisol reactivity to stress, findings from
this study showed that lower cortisol stress reactivity was associated with obesity and the risk of
developing obesity and with symptoms of depression and anxiety (see de Rooij 2013). Numerous
other recent studies have showed that low or blunted cortisol reactivity to stress is associated with
high levels of chronic stress and increased risk of negative physical and mental health outcomes
(e.g., Lovallo et al. 2019, O’Connor et al. 2017, Padden et al. 2019, Zorn et al. 2017). For example, Padden et al. (2019) reported that blunted cortisol reactivity was the dominant pattern of
physiological reactivity that emerged from studies of caregivers of individuals with autism spectrum disorder. In another study, O’Connor et al. (2017) found that individuals who had previously
made a suicide attempt exhibited low levels of cortisol in response to an acute stressor compared
to control participants. Moreover, the results of a meta-analysis in the area of early-life adversity
668 O’Connor • Thayer • Vedhara
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
found evidence of a robust association between early-life adversity and a blunted cortisol response
to social stress (Bunea et al. 2017).
Taken together, the evidence is converging to suggest that both heightened and blunted cortisol responses to acute stressors are associated with increased future health risk. To this end, Carroll
et al. (2017) have put forward a model of blunted stress reactivity that attempts to integrate the
evidence linking exaggerated and blunted stress responses into a single unifying framework. They
argue that the health-damaging effects of heightened reactivity to stress are well established especially in relation to cardiovascular pathology; however, our understanding the effects of low or
blunted reactivity remains in its infancy. Nevertheless, current theorizing suggests that there is a
nonlinear inverted-U relationship, such that high and low levels of cortisol are likely to be deleterious. Similar relationships have been demonstrated for other hormones and important aspects
of behavior (cf. O’Connor et al. 2001).
Stress, Cortisol Awakening Response, and Health Outcomes
The diurnal pattern of cortisol production is characterized by two distinct components: the peak
levels after awakening [i.e., the cortisol awakening response (CAR)] and the diminishing levels
throughout the rest of the day (i.e., the diurnal cortisol slope) (Adam et al. 2017, Clow et al. 2010,
Fries et al. 2009, O’Connor et al. 2009, Pruessner et al. 1997). As outlined above, cortisol plays
an important regulatory function for many of the body’s basic biological systems (e.g., metabolic,
immune, inflammatory processes), and disruption of its diurnal rhythm is likely to affect the functioning of these systems in ways that may have consequences for health over time (Lupien et al.
2009, Sapolsky et al. 2000). A relatively large amount of research has explored the links between
diurnal cortisol levels and health outcomes (Adam et al. 2017). We briefly review this literature in
the next section, but first we consider the relationship between stress and the CAR.
The CAR, the steep rise in cortisol that occurs in the first 30 to 45 minutes after waking, has
been a popular topic of recent research, though its function and regulation are not yet fully understood. There is evidence that the CAR is under different regulatory control from the cortisol that
is released across the rest of the day (Clow et al. 2010, Schmidt-Reinwald et al. 1999). Moreover,
it has been theorized that the function of the CAR is to prepare the individual for the demands of
the upcoming day (Powell & Schlotz 2012). The CAR has been linked with stress and a range of
health outcomes, though the pattern of results has been mixed (e.g., Adam et al. 2010, Chida &
Steptoe 2009, Clow et al. 2010, Gartland et al. 2014, O’Connor et al. 2013, Steptoe & Serwinski
2016). In terms of psychological stress, a number of studies have found links between stress and
increases in the CAR (e.g., De Vugt et al. 2005, Wust et al. 2000). Conversely, other evidence
has shown that chronic stress may disrupt HPA axis regulation and lead to a blunted CAR (e.g.,
Mortensen et al. 2019; O’Connor et al. 2009, 2013; Steptoe & Serwinski 2016; Thorn et al. 2006).
Furthermore, in terms of health outcomes, a comprehensive meta-analysis by Chida & Steptoe
(2009) confirmed similar findings and reported that different psychosocial factors are associated
with both enhanced and reduced cortisol awakening responses. In particular, they found that the
CAR was positively associated with job stress and general life stress but negatively associated with
fatigue, burnout, exhaustion, and post-traumatic stress syndrome. More recently, using a combination of meta-analysis and P-curve analysis, Boggero et al. (2017) also found divergent findings,
with depression being linked to higher CAR and post-traumatic stress being linked to lower CAR.
Methodological issues likely contributed to these mixed findings (see expert consensus
guidelines in Stalder et al. 2016). Measurement of the CAR is particularly sensitive to protocol
violations (e.g., getting out of bed before the first sample is taken or not providing samples at
the correct time). Therefore, future research needs to continue to take steps to minimize issues
www.annualreviews.org • Stress and Health 669
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
such as participant nonadherence in order to reduce the noise in these findings (e.g., using
electronic containers to collect cortisol samples that record the time of collection). In addition,
future studies investigating CAR ought to increase the number of measurement days in order to
improve the reliability of the CAR measures (Segerstrom et al. 2014).
In terms of the relationship between stress and the CAR, Steptoe & Serwinski (2016) have
argued that higher CAR may be observed under conditions that require individuals to actively
cope with the demands of the upcoming day, whereas lower CAR may be observed under severely
stressful conditions that cannot be dealt with by active behavioral responses. Alternatively, it is our
view that the mixed findings may also be explained in terms of allostatic load and overload. For example, it is possible that moderate to high CAR during periods of increased demand and challenge
may reflect the normal adaptive response to a stressful environment (allostatic load). However, in
the context of fatigue, post-traumatic stress disorder, and burnout, the lower CAR may reflect
dysregulation of the HPA axis following exposure to more severe chronic stress over a long period
that is consistent with allostatic overload or so-called toxic stress (McEwen 2018). Indeed, this
view is consistent with recent meta-analytical evidence in the context of suicide (O’Connor et al.
2016) and, more generally, with a previous review linking chronic stress and the HPA axis (Miller
et al. 2007).
In sum, it is clear that the CAR is an important index of HPA axis activity and provides valuable
insights into the relationship between psychological factors, HPA axis function, health, and wellbeing. As is the case with cortisol reactivity to stress, existing evidence suggests that both low
and high CAR may be associated with health risk. Future research ought to establish the precise
regulatory function of the CAR, incorporating longitudinal designs and repeated assessments.
Stress, the Diurnal Cortisol Slope, and Health Outcomes
The variation in cortisol levels across the day is large and reaches its nadir at bedtime. Like the
CAR, the diurnal cortisol slope has been the focus of a great deal of research, and it has been argued
that the disruption of cortisol’s circadian rhythm may affect a large range of central and peripheral biological systems that contribute to negative physical and mental health outcomes over time
(Adam et al. 2017, Lupien et al. 2009). A substantial number of studies have found that there is
an association between a flatter cortisol slope and adverse outcomes such as depression, cardiovascular disease, inflammation, fatigue, obesity, and suicide attempt (Matthews et al. 2006, Nater
et al. 2008, O’Connor et al. 2020b, Schrepf et al. 2014, Ruttle et al. 2013). However, other studies
have failed to find associations between the diurnal cortisol slope or have yielded inconsistent or
contrary findings (e.g., Turner-Cobb et al. 2011, Vedhara et al. 2006).
Despite the burgeoning amount of research in this area, the first systematic review and metaanalysis was published only in 2017: Adam et al. (2017) synthesized 179 associations from 80
studies and found consistent evidence showing that flatter cortisol slopes were associated with
poorer health outcomes in 10 out of 12 subtypes of emotional and physical health (i.e., cancer, depression, externalizing, internalizing, fatigue, inflammatory/immune response, obesity/body mass
index/adiposity, other mental health, and other physical health). Moreover, they reported that the
largest effect size was for the inflammatory/immune outcomes. These findings are important because they confirm that a flatter diurnal cortisol slope is associated with a broad range of health
outcomes. The authors argue that these results suggest that there may be a general shared mechanism that is common to multiple disease states (Adam et al. 2017). They suggest that these findings
provide convincing support for a direct causal pathway linking flattened diurnal cortisol rhythms
to dysregulation in multiple downstream biological and behavioral systems and thus to the development of negative health outcomes.
670 O’Connor • Thayer • Vedhara
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
SNS: sympathetic
nervous system
PNS: parasympathetic
nervous system
Adam et al. (2017, p. 37) also introduce the concept of stress-related circadian dysregulation
(SCiD) and argue that the association between flatter diurnal cortisol and modifications of circadian biology found by the existing research is a sign of SCiD. They suggest that future research on
stress and health should focus on identifying the psychosocial origins of the early signs of stressinduced circadian dysregulations, as these changes across multiple biological systems are likely
to lead to major mental and physical health problems in the future. Moreover, they argue that
multiple coregulatory systems are involved in the development of SCiD, and that interventions
should target multiple levels of the system (e.g., psychological, behavioral, and biological) and ultimately aim to correct the expected circadian rhythms rather than correcting those levels per se.
This represents a promising area for future investigation.
Stress and Hair Cortisol
An exciting recent advance in the area of stress and health research is the assessment of cortisol in
hair. Hair cortisol provides an alternative biomarker of HPA axis activation, free from many of the
limitations of other existing biological measures (saliva, urine, and blood). Following the discovery
of glucocorticoids in hair in 2004 (Raul et al. 2004), researchers have been exploring the reliability
and validity of hair cortisol measurement. A 1-cm hair segment (closest to the scalp) provides a
measure of average cortisol secretion over the past month, whereas a 3-cm hair segment provides
a measure of cortisol secretion over the past three months. Recent reviews have found that hair
cortisol is a reliable indicator of chronic stress and is positively associated with body mass index,
waist-to-hip ratio, pregnancy in women undergoing in vitro fertilization, and cardiometabolic
risk factors for cardiovascular disease (CVD) such as high BP, diabetes, and adiposity (e.g., Lob &
Steptoe 2019, Massey et al. 2016, Stalder et al. 2017, Wright et al. 2015). Future research ought
to incorporate hair cortisol measures in the study design and include multiple assessments, ideally
in longitudinal studies.
Effects of Stress on Autonomic Nervous System Regulation and Dynamics
The evidence for the role of the ANS in stress and health is overwhelming and extensive. The
sympathetic nervous system (SNS), associated with energy mobilization and the fight-or-flight response, and the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), associated with vegetative and restorative
functions and with rest-and-digest, represent the two major branches of the ANS. In good health
conditions, these systems are normally in dynamic balance, with the PNS dominating. However,
as outlined above, under conditions of stress an imbalance can occur in which fight-or-flight responses are chronically activated, leading to excessive wear and tear on physiological systems (allostatic load). One mechanism that links the ANS to BP is the baroreflex. Pressure-sensitive receptors in the carotid and aortic arches sense increases and decreases in BP and transmit those
signals to the brain to produce reflex adjustments in BP via the regulation of sympathetic and
parasympathetic outflows in order to maintain blood flow to vital organs such as the brain and
heart (Benarroch 2008). Thus, ANS activity as indexed by myocardial contractility, peripheral
vascular resistance, HR, and heart rate variability (HRV) works to regulate BP via the baroreflex.
Importantly, there is emerging evidence for an important role of the baroreflex in long-term BP
regulation (Thrasher 2006).
Autonomic imbalance, in which SNS tone is high and PNS tone is low, is associated with a
wide range of disorders and diseases both mental and physical, including internalizing disorders,
externalizing disorders, and psychotic disorders as well as cardiometabolic diseases such as hypertension, coronary heart disease, and diabetes (Beauchaine & Thayer 2015, Thayer et al. 2010).
www.annualreviews.org • Stress and Health 671
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
One of the leading proponents of the autonomic imbalance concept, the cardiologist Stevo Julius,
noted that one of the major causes of this autonomic imbalance is the chronic activation of the
defense/vigilance response ( Julius 1995). From a psychological perspective this defense/vigilance
response is associated with perseverative cognition (e.g., worry, rumination, and angry brooding),
and a recent meta-analysis has linked such perseverative cognition to endocrine, cardiovascular,
and autonomic activities such as increased cortisol, BP, and HR and decreased vagally mediated
HRV (Ottaviani et al. 2015). Other meta-analyses have linked perseverative cognition to poorer
health behaviors (Clancy et al. 2016, 2020). As noted above, both increased and decreased or
blunted responses have been associated with increased risk.
Numerous models of stress have tried to explain these relationships. One of the early models was the recurrent activation model, or the so-called reactivity hypothesis (Krantz & Manuck
1984). In this model, repeated activation of stress systems would lead to poor health outcomes.
However, evidence for the generalizability of these increased responses to laboratory tasks to
real-life stress responses was found to be limited (Lovallo 2016), thus suggesting other mechanisms through which stress can influence physiological responses. Another early approach that
has been largely overlooked is the prevailing state model (Manuck & Krantz 1984). In this model,
the large laboratory responses generalized not to exaggerated acute responses but to large generally elevated response levels (i.e., prevailing state) in real life. More recently, as mentioned above,
some scholars have proposed models suggesting that blunted responses may be associated with
increased risk (Carroll et al. 2017). One way in which these various models can be reconciled is
the generalized unsafety theory of stress (GUTS) (Brosschot et al. 2016, 2017, 2018). This model
proposes that the fight-or-flight response is in fact the default response that is more or less always on unless turned off by safety. This actually comports well with the autonomic imbalance
model advanced by Julius and its association with the defense/vigilance response. As stated by
Julius (1995), large-magnitude responses of physiological systems to threat (reactivity) are adaptive, from an evolutionary perspective, and may have been selected for in our ancestors. However,
when these responses are prolonged by anticipatory activation or delayed recovery, they can lead
to chronic ANS imbalance (i.e., prevailing state). Excessive activation of these systems can lead
to their overuse and dysregulation (i.e., blunted responses or allostatic overload). Importantly,
Julius notes that in contemporary life it is necessary to dampen this default defense response to
reduce the deleterious effects of this previously adaptive rapid and strong defense reaction ( Julius
1995). Research increasingly suggests that this is accomplished by the recognition of safety, and
that failures to recognize safety signals, rather than perceptions of threat, may be associated with
poor mental and physical health (Brosschot et al. 2016, 2017, 2018; Craske et al. 2012; Mayne
et al. 2018). Needless to say, much more work is needed to further validate these intriguing ideas.
In the next sections, we provide some of the empirical support for the association of the ANS
(particularly BP and HRV) with stress and health.
Effects of Stress on Blood Pressure, Heart Rate, Heart Rate Variability,
and Their Dynamics
Numerous studies and meta-analyses have linked BP responses to mental stress to poor health
outcomes. This literature is extensive, and here we only summarize some recent reviews and fundamental studies. Gasperin et al. (2009) reported a meta-analysis of cohort studies on the effect
of psychological stress on BP reactivity and recovery. They identified 6 eligible cohort studies
representing over 34,000 participants. Greater BP responses to psychological stress (i.e., greater
reactivity as well as higher recovery levels) were associated with a 21% greater risk of elevated BP
11 years later relative to those with smaller BP responses. The authors suggest that management of
672 O’Connor • Thayer • Vedhara
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
psychological stress may be an important component of hypertension management. Landesbergis
et al. (2013) examined the association between job strain and ambulatory BP. They reported the results of a meta-analysis of 22 cross-sectional studies and showed that a single exposure to job strain
was associated with higher ambulatory systolic BP (SBP) and diastolic BP (DBP). Specifically, they
showed that job strain was associated with 3.43 mm Hg higher SBP and 2.07 mm Hg higher DBP
during working hours, 2.55 mm Hg higher SBP and 1.90 mm Hg higher DBP at home, and
3.67 mm Hg higher SBP and 2.06 mm Hg higher DBP during sleep. This latter finding is particularly relevant, as sleep should represent a period of relative safety and a lack of BP dipping at night
is associated with end organ damage such as left ventricular hypertrophy, myocardial infarction,
and stroke (Cuspidi et al. 2010).
Similarly, numerous studies have shown an association between ANS imbalance, as indexed by
high HR and low vagally mediated HRV, and poor health outcomes. Some of this work has been
summarized elsewhere (Thayer & Lane 2007, Thayer et al. 2010) and will not be detailed here.
With respect to the role of stress, two systematic reviews have examined the effect of work stress on
HRV. Jarczok et al. (2013) systematically reviewed the association between work stress and HRV
and found 19 studies representing over 8,000 employees from 10 countries published between
1976 and 2008. The authors reported that adverse work conditions were generally associated with
decreased HRV. A recent update of this analysis examined 18 studies published between 2013
and 2019, representing over 29,000 participants, and reported that adverse work conditions again
were generally associated with decreased HRV ( Jarczok et al. 2020). Given that a recent large
study reported that low levels of vagally mediated HRV were associated with elevated risk in the
clinical range (odds ratios ranging from 1.5 to 3.5) for a wide range of biomarkers, these reviews
of work stress suggest that such stress may have important implications for the risk of developing
a wide range of cardiometabolic and inflammatory diseases ( Jarczok et al. 2019).
Kivimäki & Steptoe (2018) provide a comprehensive review on the role of stress in the development and progression of cardiovascular disease. They show that pooling data from several large
studies into mega-studies has led to an increased understanding of the role of psychological stress
in CVD. For example, they reviewed studies on the etiology of CVD in the general population
and reported hazard ratios ranging from 1.13 to 2.07 for the association of psychological stressors
(as indexed by work stress and childhood stress) with CVD, coronary heart disease, and stroke.
They conclude, however, that the evidence for scalable interventions to reduce such risk is scarce.
These reviews provide strong evidence that psychological stress can have deleterious effects on
health via the ANS. We next examine some primary studies that have investigated the effects of
stress on ANS dynamics, including delayed recovery especially during the nighttime.
One area of emerging research focuses on circadian variation of ANS activity and its association with psychological stress. As mentioned above, nighttime or sleep should represent a period
of restoration, relative safety, and associated relative decreases in SNS and increases in PNS activity. It has long been reported that elevated HR and BP at night are associated with increased
mortality. For example, it has been reported that relative to those with a 10% or greater decrease
in SBP or HR at night, individuals who had no SBP decrease but an HR decrease had a hazard
ratio for mortality of 1.39, those who had a SBP decrease but no HR decrease had a hazard ratio of
1.46, and those who had neither a HR or a SBP decrease had a hazard ratio of 1.9 (Ben-Dov et al.
2007). Both acute and chronic stress have been associated with a blunted HRV increase at night. In
a study of healthy young adults, it was reported that the acute stress of an impending public speech
was associated with a blunted nighttime increase in HRV the night before the speech (Hall et al.
2004). Work stress has also been associated with a blunted HRV increase at night, particularly in
older workers (Loerbroks et al. 2010). Psychological factors have been associated with nighttime
BP as well. Numerous studies have reported associations between stress, job strain, hostility, and
www.annualreviews.org • Stress and Health 673
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
CTRA (conserved
transcriptional
response to
adversity): a pattern of
gene expression
characterized by the
upregulation of
proinflammatory
genes and the
downregulation of
genes associated with
antiviral resistance and
antibody production
perceived discrimination, as well as social integration, social support, and BP dipping, with the
deleterious psychological factors being associated with less BP dipping and the salubrious psychological factors being associated with greater BP dipping (e.g., Fallo et al. 2002, Fan et al. 2013,
Tomfohr et al. 2010). For example, a systematic review of the association between social support
and BP dipping reported that greater functional social support was associated with a moderateto-large effect on BP dipping (Fortmann & Gallo 2013). These effects of stress on HRV and BP
may be associated via the baroreflex. For example, one study found that lower HRV was associated with blunted BP dipping in patients with resistant hypertension (Salles et al. 2014). Another
study reported that low HRV predicted the development of a nondipping BP pattern 2 years later
(Dauphinot et al. 2010). Future studies are needed to more fully explicate the associations between
psychological factors such as stress and circadian variations in ANS activity.
Models of the effects of stress on ANS function suggest that both large and small responses
may be associated with poorer health outcomes. Ultimately, prolonged stress responses are needed
to produce deleterious health effects, and data collected during periods of rest or sleep may be
particularly informative. Integrative models such as GUTS may help reconcile these seemingly
contradictory findings.
The Role of Social Genomics in Elucidating the Relationship
Between Stress and Health
Technological and scientific developments in our understanding of the human genome are now
providing fascinating insights into the molecular mechanisms by which stress influences health.
Specifically, the recognition that gene expression can be influenced by the environment, combined
with the development of powerful methods that permit the simultaneous mapping of the entire
human genome (Cole 2019), has allowed investigators to explore whether and how external factors
like stress regulate the activity of our genes and, therefore, influence health.
This exploration started just over a decade ago with a small study that focused not on stress but
on its coconspirator, social isolation (Cole et al. 2007). Drawing on decades of research showing
that socially isolated individuals have an increased risk of disease and mortality, the group examined whether patterns of gene expression differed in a systematic way between individuals reporting high versus low levels of subjective loneliness (based on responses to the UCLA Loneliness
Scale) over a 3-year period. They observed that the immune cells of chronically lonely individuals
were characterized by an upregulation or increased expression of pro-inflammatory genes, and the
downregulation of genes associated with antiviral resistance and antibody production. Put another
way, the genes associated with increasing the risk of or exacerbating inflammation-related conditions were more likely to be switched on, and those associated with protection from viral illness
were more likely to be switched off. These findings provided for the first time a molecular explanation for the increased risk of disease observed in individuals with low levels of social support. It
was not long before chronic stress would be listed among a host of different adverse experiences
associated with this distinctive pattern of gene expression (Cole et al. 2007, Miller et al. 2014),
which has become known as the conserved transcriptional response to adversity (CTRA).
Stress Results Not in the Downregulation but in the Dysregulation
of Immunity
Taken together, these works on how varying indices of adversity influence the human genome
have precipitated an important paradigm shift in our understanding of how stress affects health.
In particular, they challenge the once dominant view that stress results in ill-health because it gives
rise to widespread suppression of the immune system. On the contrary, it is now clear that chronic
674 O’Connor • Thayer • Vedhara
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
stress can precipitate changes in gene expression associated with both the upregulation and the
downregulation of the immune system (Cole 2013). This, in turn, helps to explain the once seemingly anomalous observation that stress can be associated with diseases involving increased activity
of the immune system (e.g., inflammation-related diseases such as heart disease and autoimmune
conditions) as well as diseases associated with immune suppression (e.g., impaired responses to
viral infections and vaccinations).
The discovery and characterization of the CTRA has had other notable implications for our
understanding of the relationship between stress and health. One of these pertains to the debate
regarding the utility of the term “stress” and whether it should only be employed in contexts where
a serious threat to well-being is likely (Kagan 2016). Pursuant to Kagan’s criticism, the literature
on stress and gene expression has fallen into the trap of conceptualizing stress in a variety of ways,
most commonly through objective measures of adversity as well as subjective experiences (Cole
et al. 2011, Miller et al. 2008). Although both conceptualizations have been shown to be associated with the CTRA pattern, Cole observes that activation of this pattern is often more strongly
associated with subjective experiences of adversity than with objective indices (Cole 2013). Does
this suggest that our focus should be only on indices that capture the subjective experience of
stress? Perhaps. But as objective indices of stressor exposure can also be associated with genomic
changes (and because some forms of stress manifest outside conscious awareness; see Mehl et al.
2017), it would seem preferable that we continue our permissive conceptualization of stress. However, rather than adopting a singular perspective, we should accommodate both objective stressors
and subjective responses in models that have sufficient power to delineate their combined consequences on human health (Miller & Chen 2006).
Enhancing Our Understanding of the Role Played by Cortisol
A further area in which social genomics has helped our understanding of the stress–illness relationship concerns the role played by the HPA axis as a mediator. As discussed above, the activation
of this axis and the subsequent release of glucocorticoids are incontrovertible consequences of
stress. Indeed, the immunomodulatory properties of cortisol have played a large part in sustaining the view that stress leads to ill-health due to widespread suppression of the immune system.
However, the contradiction at the heart of this hypothesis is that if cortisol results in ill-health
because it suppresses the immune system, then why does it not also protect us from conditions
that arise or are exacerbated by increased immune system activity (e.g., inflammation-related and
autoimmune diseases; see Miller et al. 2002, Raison & Miller 2003)? This led to the evolution of
the glucocorticoid resistance hypothesis (Miller et al. 2002), which proposes that, although the
HPA axis continues to produce cortisol in response to chronic stress, the persistence of inflammation in the presence of cortisol occurs because glucocorticoid receptors on immune cells become
desensitized over time. In other words, the immune cells become blunted to the signal to switch
off, resulting in a mild but persistent level of inflammation. Both human and animal studies have
provided support for this hypothesis (Cohen et al. 2012, Miller et al. 2008). The combination
of genome-wide expression analysis with bioinformatics has allowed us to understand the nature
of this blunting in more detail, and the evidence suggests that chronic exposure to cortisol results in both the reduced expression of anti-inflammatory genes and the increased activity of the
transcription factors promoting inflammation (Cole 2013).
Interventions and Gene Expression: A Promising Area of Enquiry
We must acknowledge, however, that much of the evidence reviewed here of the association between indices of adversity such as stress and patterns of gene expression is correlational. This of
www.annualreviews.org • Stress and Health 675
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
course raises two questions. First, are these relationships causal, and if so, in what direction (i.e.,
does stress alter gene expression or do these patterns of gene expression give rise to stress)? Second, are observed effects amenable to change? Results from early trials show great promise. A
range of interventions often deployed in the context of stress, such as yoga, mindfulness, and cognitive behavioral therapy, have shown evidence of post-intervention alterations in gene expression
(Antoni et al. 2012, Black et al. 2013, Bower et al. 2014, Creswell et al. 2012). These interventions
have ranged from 8 to 12 weeks in duration and have been conducted with healthy individuals
and people with disease. These findings clearly illustrate significant changes to the CTRA profile
after the intervention, which is consistent with a reduction in pro-inflammatory gene expression
(Antoni et al. 2012, Bower et al. 2014, Creswell et al. 2012) and, to a lesser degree, an upregulation
of antiviral immunity (Black et al. 2013). Studies in animal models have also confirmed that stress
and social adversity can causally increase inflammatory gene expression and decrease antiviral gene
expression (Cole et al. 2015, Snyder-Mackler et al. 2016).
So our current understanding of how stress influences health has benefited immeasurably from
social genomics. It has allowed us to move away from the simplistic view that stress only results in
immune suppression and to explain the paradox of stress being able to simultaneously affect both
disease processes that thrive during periods of immune activity and those that require immune
suppression. It has also facilitated a more sophisticated understanding of the role of the HPA axis
as a mediator of the stress–health relationship. At the same time the research on interventions has
served to consolidate the view not only that stress can alter our well-being, but also that psychological interventions can attenuate these deleterious effects. Questions abound regarding the potency
of the intervention effects and whether they could result in clinically relevant improvements in
health. Similarly, it remains unclear which factors determine whether individuals exposed to stress
will succumb to diseases associated with an upregulation of genes associated with inflammation
or to disease associated with a downregulation of viral immunity. There is little doubt that social
genomics will continue to contribute to this discourse.
THE CLINICAL RELEVANCE OF STRESS: THE CASE
OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES
The preceding section has hopefully left the reader with little doubt that psychological stress
has physiological repercussions that have implications for the functioning of the immune system.
However, the criticism leveled at much of this work has been, does it matter? In other words, are
these physiological changes clinically relevant? Can they increase the risk of disease, advance the
progression of coexisting conditions, or indeed influence mortality? Here we look at some of the
evidence pertaining to disease risk, with a specific focus on infectious diseases.
The Obstacles Inherent in Examining the Clinical Relevance of Stress
Attempts to understand whether stress increases the likelihood of new illnesses have had to contend with three main challenges. The first is knowing when someone will experience stress, and
it is of course common to all research in this field. Here the challenge is that one of the hallmarks
of a stressful experience is its unpredictability (when it will happen, how bad it will be, how long it
will last, etc.). Thus, one could argue that attempts to make stressful experiences predictable could
diminish both the ecological validity of the stressors and the potency of the stressors’ effects on
emotional and physical well-being. However, psychologists are of course adept at innovative study
designs and experimental manipulation, and researchers have developed a portfolio of approaches
to ensure the presence of stress. Most commonly this has involved experimentally controlling
676 O’Connor • Thayer • Vedhara
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
stressor exposure (e.g., the Trier Social Stress Test; see Kirschbaum et al. 1993), taking advantage of predictable stressful experiences (e.g., examinations; see Glaser et al. 1992), or focusing on
populations experiencing known chronic stressors (e.g., caregiving; see Vedhara et al. 1999a).
The second challenge pertains to controlling the exposure to a pathogen (i.e., any biological
agent capable of producing illness). To determine if stress can give rise to illness, study participants should be exposed both to stress and to a pathogen to which they are vulnerable. This is
because the experience of stress on its own is unlikely to give rise to disease within the confines
of most study designs (with the notable exception of epidemiological cohorts that benefit from
longitudinal follow-ups extending over many decades; see Marmot & Brunner 2005).
The third challenge is selecting an outcome measure representing health that may be regarded
as clinically relevant. Initially the field was dominated by studies examining the effects of stress
on experimental, or in vitro, tests of immunity. Although this literature has been influential in
establishing the veracity of the effects of stress on the body, for several reasons it did not allow
researchers to determine its clinical relevance, that is, its consequences for health. First, these
experimental tests rely on taking samples (e.g., blood, saliva) and then measuring aspects of immunity within the sample. Thus, the assessment of the immune system is conducted outside of the
body. Second, they typically focus on single aspects of the immune system, such as number of immune cells or levels of activity in response to pathogens. However, this does not reflect the ways in
which the immune system protects against disease, which usually involves the coordinated activity
of multiple cells, proteins, and chemicals that work together to eradicate or contain pathogens to
which we are susceptible. Third, the pathogens are often synthetic, that is, they are unlikely to
give rise to disease in humans. While these tests of immunity permit greater experimental control, they clearly differ considerably from the normal functioning of the immune system (Vedhara
et al. 1999b). Thus, it soon became clear that experimental tests of immunity alone would not
allow scholars to determine the clinical relevance of stress and other psychosocial influences for
health.
The field was then revolutionized by two methodological innovations that occurred in close
succession, which addressed both the problem of pathogen exposure and that of identifying acceptable indices of disease or vulnerability to disease: the viral challenge paradigm and vaccine
studies.
Viral Challenge Studies
The viral challenge paradigm was pioneered by Sheldon Cohen and colleagues. This approach
typically involves quarantining healthy volunteers for several days during which they are exposed
to one or more respiratory viruses (using nasal drops) and then tested for evidence of infection
(determined through the presence of virus in nasal samples or a significant increase in antibody
levels) and, arguably most importantly, illness (i.e., developing a clinical cold). In their early work
(Cohen et al. 1991), illness was operationalized as the presence of infection and of physician and
self-report ratings. More recently, they have adopted the objective markers of nasal mucus production (determined by collecting and weighing used tissues) and the ability to clear mucus from
the nose (determined by the time taken for participants to taste a saccharine solution administered
into the nose) (Cohen et al. 2015).
In their very first study, Cohen et al. (1991) computed a stress index derived from scales measuring stressful life events, negative affect, and perceived stress, and they examined the relationship between their stress index and the likelihood of both infection and illness. They reported a
dose–response relationship such that increases in stress increased the risk of developing a cold.
Furthermore, these effects occurred across a range of different viruses.
www.annualreviews.org • Stress and Health 677
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
This study provided clear evidence that psychological stress is associated with an increased
risk of disease, specifically infectious disease, and that the effect is generalizable across a range of
pathogens. Furthermore, by capturing a measure of both infection and illness, the authors were
also able to establish that the relationship between stress and infection is much stronger than
the relationship between stress and illness. This is perhaps unsurprising, as we would expect the
immune system in otherwise healthy individuals to contain and eradicate most infections before
they result in symptoms of disease.
Since this groundbreaking work, Cohen and colleagues have used their paradigm to further
elucidate the connections between stress and risk of disease. Indeed, and of particular relevance to
Kagan’s criticism of the overuse of the term “stress,” the viral challenge studies have shown that,
in terms of the common cold at least, individuals at greatest risk of illness are those contending
with chronic stressors (of 1 month or longer in duration) and for whom the sources of stress
are interpersonal or employment related (Cohen et al. 1998). This increased risk associated with
chronic stressors has also been supported by the unparalleled meta-analytical review of stress and
immunity conducted by Segerstrom & Miller (2004), which synthesized evidence from over 300
empirical studies conducted over 30 years and concluded that there is clear evidence that chronic
stressors result in widespread suppression of the immune system.
The viral challenge studies have also illuminated the pathways by which stress may alter our
vulnerability to disease. Specifically, they find that while health behaviors such as sleep quality,
physical activity, and smoking are often associated with developing an illness, these behaviors appear to largely have direct effects—i.e., they do not completely mediate the relationship between
stress and illness onset (Cohen 2005). These studies have also contributed to our understanding
that the relationship between stress and health is both nuanced and multifaceted, involving a range
of psychosocial factors that exert both direct and indirect effects on health. For example, the relationship between stress, social support, and vulnerability to the common cold appears to vary
according to how support is defined. Measures of social integration (which capture the number of
roles in which the respondent has social contacts) appear to enjoy a direct relationship with disease
vulnerability, such that individuals reporting greater social integration are less vulnerable to the
common cold following exposure to two cold viruses; this effect is not influenced by stress (Cohen
2005, Cohen et al. 1997). Conversely, a study looking at the effects of stress due to interpersonal
tension, of perceived social support, and of hugging on illness risk revealed that, unlike social integration, perceived support did not have a direct effect on risk of illness. In contrast, there was
evidence of a buffering effect: Interpersonal tension was associated with an increased risk of illness
in participants with low levels of social support, but it was unrelated to illness risk in people with
high levels of perceived support. On the other hand, hugging had both a direct and protective
effect on illness risk (i.e., being hugged more often was associated with a reduced risk of infection) and an indirect effect: It moderated the effect of interpersonal tension on infection risk, such
that increased interpersonal tension was associated with a greater risk of illness in people who
received fewer hugs (Cohen et al. 2015). Of course, the recent COVID-19 outbreak highlights
that the relationship between different definitions of stress and support is also likely to be affected
by the nature of the infectious agent—e.g., we can speculate that hugging would not be protective
in the context of COVID-19.
Taken together, the evidence from viral challenge studies has done much to quash the skeptical
view that stress is a modern-day complaint with no lasting consequences for health. They have
shown that stress is associated with an increased risk of illness in otherwise healthy individuals and
have highlighted the importance of precision in how we operationalize not only stress but also
the myriad of psychosocial factors related to it. However, these studies remain limited by their
observational designs, which require us to assume that stress is the reason some people develop
678 O’Connor • Thayer • Vedhara
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
illness and others do not. The causal nature of the relationship requires experimental designs, and
it is here that the vaccine studies are beginning to provide tantalizing findings.
Vaccine Studies
Much like the viral challenge studies, vaccine studies have provided investigators with a means
of controlling the nature, timing, and virulence of the pathogen to which study participants are
exposed. Moreover, because vaccinations are not intended to result in illness, vaccine studies are
considered by many to be a more ethical alternative to viral challenge studies. Right after the
publication of the first viral challenge study (Cohen et al. 1991), Glaser et al. (1992) reported
their first vaccine challenge study. In this work they examined the relationship between negative
mood (related to examinations) and health in a cohort of healthy students. Their test of health
was to examine how well participants’ immune systems responded to a series of hepatitis B vaccinations. Vaccines contain live, attenuated, modified, or killed pathogens (or their toxins). When
administered, vaccines stimulate an immune response, the nature of which depends on the type of
pathogen administered. However, most often the cascade of immune activity following vaccination ends with the production of antibodies. Thus, Glaser and colleagues gave their participants
all three hepatitis B vaccines that are part of a standard vaccine schedule. They administered each
one on the third day of a 3-day exam period, and they collected blood samples immediately prior
to each vaccination to measure the antibody response to the vaccination. So, although the focus
was still on measuring a single aspect of the immune system (i.e., antibody levels), this outcome
conferred several advantages over the experimental tests of immunity that had up to this point
dominated the field. First, antibody levels are recognized to correlate well with protection from
disease (Plotkin 2010). Second, they represent the culmination of an integrated immune response.
Third, they capture a response that occurs within the person (rather than in vitro) and that is precipitated following exposure to a natural, not synthetic, pathogen. Finally, the response is achieved
without exposing individuals to the risk of disease. Therefore, Glaser and colleagues provided the
scientific community with a test of health that offered a surrogate, but credible, measure of an
individual’s risk of disease.
Their results revealed that students who seroconverted after the first vaccination (i.e., who produced an increase in antibody levels indicative of protection against the disease) were those who
reported the lowest levels of anxiety and stress across the exam periods. This association between
measures of mood and antibody responses to vaccination has been replicated many times across a
range of populations and vaccinations (Marsland et al. 2006, Vedhara et al. 1999). Indeed, successive reviews have attested to the presence of a clear and convincing negative association between
stress and antibody responses, suggesting that stress results in reduced vaccine effectiveness and,
therefore, increased risk of disease (Cohen et al. 2001, Pedersen et al. 2009). The public health
implications of these findings are profound, given that vaccines are usually targeted at those who
are at the greatest risk of disease (e.g., the elderly), and they suggest that vaccines may be least
effective in those whom they seek most to protect.
The vaccine literature has, however, also provided a growing body of work suggesting that
some forms of stress (e.g., acute stress; see Edwards et al. 2006) and factors that can be regarded
as protective against stress (e.g., physical activity or positive mood; see Ansorge & Schön 1987,
Edwards et al. 2007) may actually enhance the effectiveness of vaccines. Indeed, we have also seen
a corresponding increase in clinical trials in this area. These trials typically examine the effects
of psychological interventions aimed at reducing stress, or at enhancing areas of functioning that
protect or buffer against stress, on how effective vaccines are in protecting against disease. A recent
systematic review identified nine such trials (Vedhara et al. 2019) and reported that six of them
www.annualreviews.org • Stress and Health 679
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
showed some evidence of an improved antibody response following a psychological intervention.
However, the review also noted significant methodological issues: There was heterogeneity in
intervention approaches, with four broad categories of intervention across nine trials; effects on
antibody outcomes were not uniform, as benefit across all antibody outcomes and all time points
was only seen in a third of trials; and many trials did not report on adherence to the interventions
or on mediating mechanisms targeted by the interventions. Thus, in keeping with the infancy
of this area of research, the authors remarked this was, at best, an early signal that psychological
interventions have the potential to boost the effectiveness of vaccines in protecting against disease.
So, Does It Matter?
The viral challenge and vaccine studies have done much to demonstrate the clinical relevance of
stress for health. In the context of infectious disease, at least, there is robust evidence that the
experience of stress increases the risk of illnesses such as the common cold and impairs the ability
of vaccines to protect the most vulnerable from diseases such as influenza. These paradigms have
also been influential in illustrating that not all forms of stress are created equal, with the strongest
effects repeatedly associated with chronic experiences of stress, and that a focus on stress alone
will serve only to curtail our understanding of the exquisite interplay between our psychology and
biology.Moreover, the relevance of these findings may not be limited to the relation between stress
and the risk of infectious diseases. As evidence emerges suggesting that diseases such as asthma
and heart disease may have their origins in infectious diseases (Cohen 2005), these findings may
have consequences for our understanding of the role of stress in health more broadly.
THE IMPORTANCE OF EARLY-LIFE ADVERSITY FOR STRESS
AND HEALTH PROCESSES
A final area of research that requires brief consideration relates to the relation between exposure to
early-life adversity and stress and health processes. Although this review focuses primarily on the
effects of current stressful experiences, we want to briefly acknowledge the important research
on the influence of past stressful experiences. Evidence of the serious health consequences of
early-life adversity (also known as adverse childhood experiences, or ACEs) is accumulating (Bellis
et al. 2015, Cruz-Pereira et al. 2020, Danese & McEwen 2012, Hughes et al. 2017, Pakulak et al.
2018, Waehrer et al. 2020). Individuals who have experienced early-life adversity (e.g., childhood
trauma, domestic violence) have been found to have more physical and mental health problems
in adulthood compared to individuals who have not (Bellis et al. 2015, Danese & Baldwin 2017).
Moreover, maltreated children and adults have been shown to have abnormally active nervous,
endocrine, and immune systems (Danese & McEwen 2012) and are significantly more likely to
develop disease (i.e., cancer, diabetes, stroke); they also have a higher mortality rate compared
to non-maltreated children and adults (Bellis et al. 2015). Recent findings have also found that
exposure to childhood trauma is associated with increased vulnerability to suicide (Carr et al. 2013;
O’Connor et al. 2018, 2020a). In one study, O’Connor et al. (2020a) found that approximately 80%
of adults who had attempted to end their own life had experienced at least one moderate-to-severe
childhood trauma.
ACEs have also been linked to altered dynamics of the HPA axis and to persistent sensitization
of the stress response system (Carpenter et al. 2007, 2011; Gerritsen et al. 2010; Lovallo et al. 2013,
2019; O’Connor et al. 2016). Carpenter et al. (2007, 2011) found that higher levels of childhood
trauma were linked with lower cortisol reactivity to a laboratory stressor. Another study found
evidence that childhood maltreatment was associated with flattened morning cortisol levels in
mid-adulthood (Power et al. 2012). Similar findings were also reported by Gerritsen et al. (2010),
680 O’Connor • Thayer • Vedhara
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
who found that early-life events were associated with lower cortisol in the morning and a flatter
slope across the day in a large sample of older persons. A recent meta-analysis found that childhood
maltreatment was associated with low awakening cortisol in studies incorporating more rigorous
designs (i.e., agency-referred samples) (Bernard et al. 2017). In the context of suicide risk, two
recent studies found that higher levels of childhood trauma were associated with lower resting
cortisol, blunted cortisol reactivity to stress, and lower cortisol levels in the morning in adulthood
(O’Connor et al. 2018, 2020a).
A promising model linking early-life adversity to stress reactivity and health risk has been proposed by Lovallo (2016), who has argued that ACEs cause modifications in frontolimbic brain
function that may lead directly to (a) reduced stress reactivity, (b) altered cognition (characterized
by a shift in focus to more short-term goals and impulsive response selection), and (c) unstable
affect regulation. Lovallo (2016) has also suggested that these three negative consequences influence the development of a more impulsive behavioral style that may increase the risk of addiction
and the engagement in poor health behaviors. Persuasive evidence for aspects of Lovallo’s model
comes from the Oklahoma Family Health Patterns Project, a cohort study of healthy young adults
with or without a family history of alcoholism. Irrespective of family history, the authors showed
that early-life adversity was associated with reduced cortisol reactivity to an acute stressor in adulthood (Lovallo 2013, Lovallo et al. 2013). Future research ought to utilize Lovallo’s framework
and examine further how precisely early-life adversity influences HPA axis functioning and stress
responsivity. Similarly, the data reported by Kivimäki & Steptoe (2018), which suggest that the
effect of childhood stress is greater than the effect of adulthood stress on the development of cardiovascular disease, invite more research into the consequences of childhood adversity on adult
health. Incorporating measures of ACEs into studies of stress and health will continue to remain
an important and fruitful avenue for research.
CONCLUSION
The cumulative science linking stress to negative health outcomes is vast. Stress can affect health
directly, through autonomic and neuroendocrine responses, but also indirectly, through changes in
health behaviors. The studies reviewed in this article confirm that stress has an impact on multiple
biological systems and that these systems interact with each other in order to adapt and respond to
changing environmental demands that are perceived as stressful. Although the field has attracted
much criticism for the heterogeneity in the way stress has been conceptualized and measured,
this variability has also played an important role in enhancing our understanding of what types
of stress affect health and in what ways. Moreover, we have clearly moved away from a simple
model according to which stress would result in too much cortisol, reduced HRV, heightened
BP, or impaired immunity and toward an understanding that these systems interact and become
dysregulated in more nuanced ways. We are now seeing that stress can alter the production of
stress mediators in ways that can both increase and blunt, both upregulate and downregulate, all
of which are likely to have serious implications for health. Future work ought to consider further
the importance of early-life adversity and continue to explore how these systems interact in the
context of stress and health research.
In 1950 Hans Selye wrote, “It will take many years, indeed many generations, before the details
of the general adaptation syndrome are satisfactorily elucidated. In fact, we shall never truly ‘understand’ this phenomenon, since the complete comprehension of life is beyond the limits of the
human mind” (Selye 1950, p. 1383).Well, here we are, many years and many generations later, and
although we may not truly understand the entire phenomenon of stress (permissive definitions or
not), we have taken giant leaps forward. There are still more exciting times ahead.
www.annualreviews.org • Stress and Health 681
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Steve Cole, Rory O’Connor, and Ronan O’Carroll for providing feedback
on an earlier draft of this article and to Sarah Wilding for assistance with some of the referencing.
LITERATURE CITED
Adam EK, Doane LD, Zinbarg RE, Mineka S, Craske MG, Griffith JW. 2010. Prospective prediction of major
depressive disorder from cortisol awakening responses in adolescence. Psychoneuroendocrinology 35:921–
31
Adam EK, Quinn ME, Tavernier R, McQuillan MT, Dahlke KA, Gilbert KE. 2017. Diurnal cortisol slopes and mental and physical health outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 83:25–41
The first review and
meta-analysis of the
relationships between
diurnal cortisol and
health outcomes. al’Absi M,Wittmers LE Jr. 2003. Enhanced adrenocortical responses to stress in hypertension-prone men and
women. Ann. Behav. Med. 25:25–33
Am. Psychol. Assoc. 2019. Stress in America 2019. Washington, DC: Am. Psychol. Assoc.
Ansorge S, Schön E. 1987. Dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DP IV), a functional marker of the T lymphocyte system.
Acta Histochem. 82:41–46
Antoni MH, Lutgendorf SK, Blomberg B, Carver CS, Lechner S, et al. 2012. Cognitive-behavioral stress
management reverses anxiety-related leukocyte transcriptional dynamics. Biol. Psychiatry 71:366–72
Beauchaine TP, Thayer JF. 2015. Heart rate variability as a transdiagnostic biomarker of psychopathology.
Int. J. Psychophysiol. 98:338–50
Bellis MA, Hughes K, Leckenby N, Hardcastle KA, Perkins C, Lowey H. 2015. Measuring mortality and
the burden of adult disease associated with adverse childhood experiences in England: a national survey.
J. Public Health 37:445–54
Benarroch EE. 2008. The arterial baroreflex: functional organization and involvement in neurologic disease.
Neurology 71:1733–38
Ben-Dov IZ, Kark JD, Ben-Ishay D, Mekler J, Ben-Arie L, Bursztyn M. 2007. Blunted heart rate dip during
sleep and all-cause mortality. Arch. Intern. Med. 167:2116–21
Bernard K, Frost A, Bennett CB, Lindhiem O. 2017. Maltreatment and diurnal cortisol regulation: a metaanalysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology 78:57–67
Black DS, Cole SW, Irwin MR, Breen E, Cyr NMS, et al. 2013. Yogic meditation reverses NF-κB and IRFrelated transcriptome dynamics in leukocytes of family dementia caregivers in a randomized controlled
trial. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38:348–55
Boggero IA, Hostinar CE, Haak EA, Murphy MLM, Segerstrom S. 2017. Psychosocial functioning and the
cortisol awakening response: meta-analysis, P-curve analysis and evaluation of the evidential value of
existing studies. Biol. Psychol. 129:207–30
Bower JE, Greendale G, Crosswell AD, Garet D, Sternlieb B, et al. 2014. Yoga reduces inflammatory signaling
in fatigued breast cancer survivors: a randomized controlled trial. Psychoneuroendocrinology 43:20–29
Brosschot JF, Verkuil B, Thayer JF. 2016. The default response to uncertainty and the importance of perceived
safety in anxiety and stress: an evolution-theoretical perspective. J. Anxiety Disord. 41:22–34
Brosschot JF, Verkuil B, Thayer JF. 2017. Exposed to events that never happen: generalized unsafety, the
default stress response, and prolonged autonomic activity. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 74:287–96
Brosschot JF, Verkuil B, Thayer JF. 2018. Generalized unsafety theory of stress: unsafe environments
and conditions, and the default stress response. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 15:464
Comprehensive
overview of an
important new theory of
stress.
Bunea I, Szentágotai-Tatar A, Miu AC. 2017. Early-life adversity and cortisol response to social stress: a meta- ˘
analysis. Transl. Psychiatry 7:1274
682 O’Connor • Thayer • Vedhara
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
Carpenter LL, Carvalho JP, Tyrka AR, Wier LM, Mello AF, et al. 2007. Decreased adrenocorticotropic hormone and cortisol responses to stress in healthy adults reporting significant childhood maltreatment.
Biol. Psychiatry 62:1080–87
Carpenter LL, Shattuck TT, Tyrka AR, Geracioti TD, Price LH. 2011. Effect of childhood physical abuse on
cortisol stress response. Psychopharmacology 214:367–75
Carr CP, Martins CM, Stingel AM, Lemgruber VB, Juruena MF. 2013. The role of early life stress in adult
psychiatric disorders: a systematic review according to childhood trauma subtypes. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis.
201:1007–20
Carroll D, Ginty AT, Whittaker AC, Lovallo WR, de Rooij SR. 2017. The behavioural, cognitive, and neural corollaries of blunted cardiovascular and cortisol reactions to acute psychological stress. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 77:74–86
Chida Y, Steptoe A. 2009. Cortisol awakening response and psychosocial factors: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Biol. Psychol. 80:265–78
Clancy F, Prestwich A, Caperon L, O’Connor DB. 2016. Perseverative cognition and health behaviours:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10:534
The first paper to
extend the perseverative
cognition hypothesis to
health behaviors.
Clancy F, Prestwich A, Caperon L, Tsipa A, O’Connor DB. 2020. The association between perseverative
cognition and sleep in non-clinical populations: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Health Psychol.
Rev. In press. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1700819
Clow A, Hucklebridge F, Stalder T, Evans P, Thorn L. 2010. The cortisol awakening response: more than a
measure of HPA axis function. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 35:97–103
Cohen S. 2005. Keynote presentation at the Eight International Congress of Behavioral Medicine.Int. J. Behav.
Med. 12:123–31
Cohen S, Doyle WJ, Skoner DP, Rabin BS, Gwaltney JM. 1997. Social ties and susceptibility to the common
cold. JAMA 277:1940–44
Cohen S, Frank E, Doyle WJ, Skoner DP, Rabin BS, Gwaltney JM Jr. 1998. Types of stressors that increase
susceptibility to the common cold in healthy adults. Health Psychol. 17:214–23
Cohen S, Gianaros PJ, Manuck SB. 2016. A stage model of stress and disease. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 11:456–63
Cohen S, Janicki-Deverts D, Doyle WJ, Miller GE, Frank E, et al. 2012. Chronic stress, glucocorticoid receptor resistance, inflammation, and disease risk. PNAS 109:5995–99
Cohen S, Janicki-Deverts D, Turner RB, Doyle WJ. 2015. Does hugging provide stress-buffering social support? A study of susceptibility to upper respiratory infection and illness. Psychol. Sci. 26:135–47
Cohen S, Miller GE, Rabin BS. 2001. Psychological stress and antibody response to immunization: a critical
review of the human literature. Psychosom. Med. 63:7–18
Cohen S, Tyrrell DA, Smith AP. 1991. Psychological stress and susceptibility to the common cold. N.
Engl. J. Med. 325:606–12
The first study to show
that increases in
psychological stress are
associated with
increased risk of
developing a common
cold.
Cole SW. 2013. Social regulation of human gene expression: mechanisms and implications for public health.
Am. J. Public Health 103:S84–92
Cole SW. 2019. The conserved transcriptional response to adversity. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 28:31–37
Cole SW, Capitanio JP, Chun K, Arevalo JMG, Ma J, Cacioppo JT. 2015. Myeloid differentiation architecture
of leukocyte transcriptome dynamics in perceived social isolation. PNAS 112:15142–47
Cole SW, Hawkley LC, Arevalo JMG, Cacioppo JT. 2011. Transcript origin analysis identifies antigenpresenting cells as primary targets of socially regulated gene expression in leukocytes.PNAS 108:3080–85
Cole SW, Hawkley LC, Arevalo JMG, Sung CY, Rose RM, Cacioppo JT. 2007. Social regulation of
gene expression in human leukocytes. Genome Biol. 8:R189
The first study to show
that gene expression is
influenced by different
levels of loneliness.
Craske MG, Wolitzky-Taylor KB, Mineka S, Zinbarg R, Waters AM, et al. 2012. Elevated responding to safe
conditions as a specific risk factor for anxiety versus depressive disorders: evidence from a longitudinal
investigation. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 121:315–24
Creswell JD, Irwin MR, Burklund LJ, Lieberman MD, Arevalo JM, et al. 2012. Mindfulness-based stress
reduction training reduces loneliness and pro-inflammatory gene expression in older adults: a small randomized controlled trial. Brain. Behav. Immun. 26:1095–101
Cruz-Pereira JS, Rea K, Nolan YM, O’Leary OF, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. 2020. Depression’s unholy trinity:
dysregulated stress, immunity, and the microbiome. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 71:49–78
www.annualreviews.org • Stress and Health 683
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
Cuspidi C, Giudici V, Negri F, Sala C. 2010. Nocturnal nondipping and left ventricular hypertrophy in hypertension: an updated review. Exp. Rev. Cardiovasc. Ther. 8:781–92
Danese A, Baldwin JR. 2017. Hidden wounds? Inflammatory links between childhood trauma and psychopathology. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 68:517–44
Danese A, McEwen BS. 2012. Adverse childhood experiences, allostasis, allostatic load and age-related disease.
Phys. Behav. 106:29–39
Dauphinot V, Gosse P, Kossovsky MP, Schott AM, Rouch I, et al. 2010. Autonomic nervous system activity is
independently associated with the risk of shift in the non-dipper blood pressure pattern. Hypertens. Res.
33:1032–37
De Rooij SR. 2013. Blunted cardiovascular and cortisol reactivity to acute psychological stress: a summary of
results from the Dutch Famine Birth Cohort Study. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 90:21–27
De Vugt ME, Nicolson NA, Aalten P, Lousberg R, Jolle J, Verhey FR. 2005. Behavioral problems in dementia
patients and salivary cortisol patterns in caregivers. J. Neuropsychiat. Clin. Neurosci. 17:201–7
Dickerson SS, Kemeny ME. 2004. Acute stressors and cortisol responses: a theoretical integration and synthesis of laboratory research. Psychol. Bull. 130:355–91
Edwards KM, Burns VE, Allen LM, McPhee JS, Bosch JA, et al. 2007. Eccentric exercise as an adjuvant to
influenza vaccination in humans. Brain Behav. Immun. 21:209–17
Edwards KM, Burns VE, Reynolds T, Carroll D, Drayson M, Ring C. 2006. Acute stress exposure prior to
influenza vaccination enhances antibody response in women. Brain Behav. Immun. 20:159–68
Fallo F, Barzon L, Rabbia F, Navarrini C, Conterno A, et al. 2002. Circadian blood pressure patterns and life
stress. Psychother. Psychosom. 71:350–56
Fan LB, Blumenthal JA, Hinderliter AL, Sherwood A. 2013. The effect of job strain on nighttime blood
pressure dipping among men and women with high blood pressure. Scand. J. Work Environ. Health 39:112
Fortmann AL, Gallo LC. 2013. Social support and nocturnal blood pressure dipping: a systematic review. Am.
J. Hypertens. 26:302–10
Fries E, Dettenborn L, Kirschbaum C. 2009. The cortisol awakening response (CAR): facts and future directions. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 72:67–73
Gartland N, O’Connor DB, Lawton R, Bristow M. 2014. Exploring day-to-day dynamics of daily stressor
appraisals, physical symptoms and the cortisol awakening response. Psychoneuroendocrinology 50:130–38
Gasperin D, Netuveli G, Dias-da-Costa JS, Pattussi MP. 2009. Effect of psychological stress on blood pressure
increase: a meta-analysis of cohort studies. Cad. Saude Publica 25:715–26
Gerritsen L, Geerlings MI, Beekman AT, Deeg DJ, Penninx BW, Comijs HC. 2010. Early and late life events
and salivary cortisol in older persons. Psychol. Med. 40:1569–78
Glaser R, Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Bonneau RH, Malarkey W, Kennedy S, Hughes J. 1992. Stress-induced modulation of the immune response to recombinant hepatitis B vaccine. Psychosom. Med. 54:22–29
Hall M, Vasko R, Buysse D, Ombao H, Chen Q, et al. 2004. Acute stress affects heart rate variability during
sleep. Psychosom. Med. 66:56–62
Hamer M, Endrighi R, Venuraju SM, Lahiri A, Steptoe A. 2012. Cortisol responses to mental stress and the
progression of coronary artery calcification in healthy men and women. PLOS ONE 7:e31356
Hamer M, O’Donnell K, Lahiri A, Steptoe A. 2010. Salivary cortisol responses to mental stress are associated
with coronary artery calcification in healthy men and women. Eur. Heart J. 31:424–29
Hamer M, Steptoe A. 2012. Cortisol responses to mental stress and incident hypertension in healthy men and
women. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 97:E29–34
Hill DC, Moss RH, Sykes-Muskett B, Conner M, O’Connor DB. 2018. Stress and eating behaviors in children
and adolescents: systematic review and meta-analysis. Appetite 123:14–22
Hughes K, Bellis MA, Hardcastle KA, Sethi D, Butchart A, et al. 2017. The effect of multiple adverse childhood
experiences on health: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Public Health 2:e356–66
Jarczok MN, Jarczok M, Mauss D, Koenig J, Li J, Herr RM, Thayer JF. 2013. Autonomic nervous system
activity and workplace stressors—a systematic review. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 37:1810–23
Jarczok MN, Jarczok M, Thayer JF. 2020. Work stress and autonomic nervous system activity. In Handbook
of Socioeconomic Determinants of Occupational Health, ed. T Theorell, pp. 625–56. Cham, Switz.: Springer
Int. Publ.
684 O’Connor • Thayer • Vedhara
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
Jarczok MN, Koenig J, Wittling A, Fischer JE, Thayer JF. 2019. First evaluation or an index of low vagallymediated heart rate variability as a marker of health risks in human adults: proof of concept. J. Clin. Med.
8:1940
Julius S. 1995. The defense reaction: a common denominator of coronary risk and blood pressure in neurogenic
hypertension? Clin. Exp. Hypertens. 17:375–86
Kagan J. 2016. An overly permissive extension. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 11:442–50
Kirschbaum C, Pirke K-M, Hellhammer DH. 1993. The “Trier Social Stress Test”—a tool for investigating psychobiological stress responses in a laboratory setting. Neuropsychobiol. 28:76–
81
One of the most popular
techniques to induce
stress in the laboratory.
Kivimäki M, Steptoe A. 2018. Effects of stress on the development and progression of cardiovascular disease.
Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 15:215
Krantz DS, Manuck SB. 1984. Acute psychophysiologic reactivity and risk of cardiovascular disease: a review
and methodologic critique. Psychol. Bull. 96:435–64
Landsbergis PA, Dobson M, Koutsouras G, Schnall P. 2013. Job strain and ambulatory blood pressure: a
meta-analysis and systematic review. Am. Public Health 103:e61–71
Lazarus RS. 1999. Stress and Emotion: A New Synthesis. New York: Springer
Lob E, Steptoe A. 2019. Cardiovascular disease and hair cortisol: a novel biomarker of chronic stress. Curr.
Cardiol. Rep. 21:116
Loerbroks A, Schilling O, Haxsen V, Jarczok MN, Thayer JF, Fischer JE. 2010. The fruits of one’s labor:
Effort-reward imbalance but not job strain is related to heart rate variability across the day in 35–44-
year-old workers. J. Psychosom. Res. 69:151–59
Lovallo WR. 2013. Early life adversity reduces stress reactivity and enhances impulsive behavior: implications
for health behaviors. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 90:8–16
Lovallo WR. 2016. Stress and Health: Biological and Psychological Interactions. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
3rd ed.
Lovallo WR, Cohoon AJ, Sorocco KH, Vincent AS, Acheson A, et al. 2019. Early-life adversity and blunted
stress reactivity as predictors of alcohol and drug use in persons with COMT (rs4680) Val158Met genotypes. Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 43:1519–27
Lovallo WR, Dickensheets SL, Myers DA, Thomas TL, Nixon SJ. 2000. Blunted stress cortisol response in abstinent alcoholic and polysubstance-abusing men. Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 24:651–
58
Early study showing
that a blunted cortisol
response may be a
marker of HPA axis
dysregulation. Lovallo WR, Farag NH, Sorocco KH, Acheson A, Cohoon AJ, Vincent AS. 2013. Early life adversity contributes to impaired cognition and impulsive behaviour: studies from the Oklahoma Family Health Patterns Project. Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 37:616–23
Lupien SJ, McEwen BS, Gunnar MR, Heim C. 2009. Effects of stress throughout the lifespan on the brain,
behaviour and cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10:434–45
Manuck SB, Krantz DS. 1984. Psychophysiologic reactivity in coronary heart disease. Behav. Med. Update
6:11–15
Marmot M, Brunner E. 2005. Cohort profile: the Whitehall II study. Int. J. Epidemiol. 34:251–56
Marsland AL, Cohen S, Rabin BS, Manuck SB. 2006. Trait positive affect and antibody response to hepatitis
B vaccination. Brain Behav. Immun. 20:261–69
Massey AJ, Campbell BK, Raine-Fenning N, Pincott-Allen C, Perry J, Vedhara K. 2016. Relationship between
hair and salivary cortisol and pregnancy in women undergoing IVF. Psychoneuroendocrinology 74:397–405
Matthews K, Schwartz J, Cohen S, Seeman T. 2006. Diurnal cortisol decline is related to coronary calcification:
CARDIA study. Psychosom. Med. 68:657–61
Mayne SL, Moore KA, Powell-Wiley TM, Evenson KR, Block R, Kershaw KN. 2018. Longitudinal associations of neighborhood crime and perceived safety with blood pressure: the Multi-Ethnic Study of
Atherosclerosis (MESA). Am. J. Hypertens. 31:1024–32
McEwen BS. 1998. Protective and damaging effects of stress mediators. N. Engl. J. Med. 338:171–79 Very influential
overview of allostasis
and allostatic load.
McEwen BS. 2000. Allostasis and allostatic load: implications for neuropsychopharmacology. Neuropsychopharmacology 22:108–24
McEwen BS. 2018. Redefining neuroendocrinology: epigenetics of brain-body communication over the life
course. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 49:8–30
www.annualreviews.org • Stress and Health 685
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
McEwen BS. 2019. What is the confusion with cortisol? Chronic Stress 3:1–3
McEwen BS, McEwen CA. 2016. Response to Jerome Kagan’s Essay on Stress (2016). Perspect. Psychol. Sci.
11:451–55
McEwen BS, Seeman T. 1999. Protective and damaging effects of mediators of stress: elaborating and testing
the concepts of allostasis and allostatic load. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 896:30–47
Mehl MR, Raison CL, Pace TW, Arevalo JM, Cole SW. 2017. Natural language indicators of differential gene
regulation in the human immune system. PNAS 114:12554–59
Miller GE, Chen E. 2006. Life stress and diminished expression of genes encoding glucocorticoid receptor
and β2-adrenergic receptor in children with asthma. PNAS 103:5496–501
Miller GE, Chen E, Sze J, Marin T, Arevalo JM, et al. 2008. A functional genomic fingerprint of chronic stress
in humans: blunted glucocorticoid and increased NF-κB signaling. Biol. Psychiatry 64:266–72
Miller GE, Chen E, Zhou ES. 2007. If it goes up, must it come down? Chronic stress and the hypothalamicpituitary-adrenocortical axis in humans. Psychol. Bull. 133:25–45
Miller GE, Cohen S, Ritchey AK. 2002. Chronic psychological stress and the regulation of pro-inflammatory
cytokines: a glucocorticoid-resistance model. Health Psychol. 21:531
Miller GE, Murphy ML, Cashman R, Ma R, Ma J, et al. 2014. Greater inflammatory activity and blunted
glucocorticoid signaling in monocytes of chronically stressed caregivers. Brain Behav. Immun. 41:191–99
Mortensen J, Dich N, Clark AJ, Ramlau-Hansen C, Head J, et al. 2019. Informal caregiving and diurnal patterns of salivary cortisol: results from the Whitehall II cohort study. Psychoneuroendocrinology 100:41–47
Nater UM, Youngblood LS, Jones JF, Unger ER, Miller AH, et al. 2008. Alterations in diurnal salivary cortisol
rhythm in a population-based sample of cases with chronic fatigue syndrome. Psychosom.Med. 70:298–305
Newman E, O’Connor DB, Conner M. 2007. Daily hassles and eating behaviour: the role of cortisol reactivity.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 32:125–32
Obrist PA. 1981. Cardiovascular Psychophysiology: A Perspective. New York: Plenum Press
O’Connor DB, Archer J, Hair WM,Wu FCW. 2001. Activational effects of testosterone on cognitive function
in men. Neuropsychologia 39:1385–94
O’Connor DB, Branley-Bell D, Green J, Ferguson E, O’Carroll R, O’Connor RC. 2020a. Effects of childhood
trauma, daily stress and emotions on daily cortisol levels in individuals vulnerable to suicide. J. Abnorm.
Psychol. 129:92–107
O’Connor DB, Ferguson E, Green J, O’Carroll RE, O’Connor RC. 2016. Cortisol and suicidal behavior: a
meta-analysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology 63:370–79
O’Connor DB, Gartland N, O’Connor RC. 2020b. Stress, cortisol and suicide risk.Int. Rev. Neurobiol. 152:101–
30
O’Connor DB, Green J, Ferguson E, O’Carroll RE, O’Connor RC. 2017. Cortisol reactivity and suicidal behavior: investigating the role of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis responses to stress in suicide
attempters and ideations. Psychoneuroendocrinology 75:183–91
O’Connor DB, Green J, Ferguson E, O’Carroll RE, O’Connor RC. 2018. Effects of childhood trauma on
cortisol levels in suicide attempters and ideations. Psychoneuroendocrinology 88:9–16
O’Connor DB, Hendrickx H, Dadd T, Talbot D, Mayes A, et al. 2009. Cortisol awakening rise in middle-aged
women in relation to chronic psychological stress. Psychoneuroendocrinology 34:1486–94
O’Connor DB, Jones F, Conner M, McMillan B, Ferguson E. 2008. Effects of daily hassles and eating style
on eating behavior. Health Psychol. 27:S20–31
O’Connor DB, Walker S, Hendrickx H, Talbot D, Schaefer A. 2013. Stress-related thinking predicts the cortisol awakening response and somatic symptoms in healthy adults. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38:438–46
Ottaviani C, Thayer JF, Verkuil B, Lonigro A, Medea B, et al. 2015. Physiological concomitants of perseverative cognition: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychol. Bull. 142:231–59
Padden C, Concialdi-McGlynn C, Lydon S. 2019. Psychophysiological measures of stress in caregivers of
individuals with autism spectrum disorder: a system review. Dev. Neurorehabilit. 22:149–63
Pakulak E, Stevens C, Neville H. 2018. Neuro-, cardio-, and immunoplasticity: effects of early adversity.Annu.
Rev. Psychol. 69:131–56
Pedersen AF, Zachariae R, Bovbjerg DH. 2009. Psychological stress and antibody response to influenza vaccination: a meta-analysis. Brain Behav. Immun. 23:427–33
686 O’Connor • Thayer • Vedhara
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
Plotkin SA. 2010. Correlates of protection induced by vaccination. Clin. Vaccine Immunol. 17:1055–65
Powell DJ, Schlotz W. 2012. Daily life stress and the cortisol awakening response: testing the anticipation
hypothesis. PLOS ONE 7:e52067
Power C, Thomas C, Li L, Hertzman C. 2012. Childhood psychosocial adversity and adult cortisol patterns.
Br. J. Psychiatry 201:199–206
Pruessner JC, Wolf OT, Hellhammer DH, Buske Kirschbaum A, von Auer K, et al. 1997. Free cortisol levels after awakening: a reliable biological marker for the assessment of adrenocortical activity. Life Sci.
61:2539–49
Raison CL, Miller AH. 2003. When not enough is too much: the role of insufficient glucocorticoid signaling
in the pathophysiology of stress-related disorders. Am. J. Psychiatry 160:1554–65
Raul J-S, Cirimele V, Ludes B, Kintz P. 2004. Detection of physiological concentrations of cortisol and cortisone in human hair. Clin. Biochem. 37:1105–11
Roseboom T, de Rooij S, Painter R. 2006. The Dutch famine and its long-term consequences for adult health.
Early Hum. Dev. 82:485–91
Ruttle PL, Javaras KN, Klein MH, Armstrong JM, Burk LR, Essex MJ. 2013. Concurrent and longitudinal
associations between diurnal cortisol and body mass index across adolescence. J. Adolesc. Health 52:731–37
Salles GF, Ribeiro FM, Guimarães GM, Muxfeldt ES, Cardoso CR. 2014. A reduced heart rate variability is
independently associated with a blunted nocturnal blood pressure fall in patients with resistant hypertension. J. Hypertens. 32:644–51
Sapolsky RM, Romero LM, Munck AU. 2000. How do glucocorticoids influence stress responses? Integrating
permissive, suppressive, stimulatory, and preparative actions. Endocr. Rev. 21:55–89
Schmidt-Reinwald A, Pruessner JC, Hellhammer DH, et al. 1999. The cortisol response to awakening in
relation to different challenge tests and a 12-hour cortisol rhythm. Life Sci. 64:1653–60
Schrepf A, O’Donnell M, Luo Y, Bradley CS, Kreder K, et al. 2014. Inflammation and inflammatory control
in interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome: associations with painful symptoms. Pain 155:1755–61
Segerstrom SC, Boggero IA, Smith GT, Sephton SE. 2014. Variability and reliability of diurnal cortisol in
younger and older adults: implications for design decisions. Psychoneuroendocrinology 49:299–309
Segerstrom SC, Miller G. 2004. Psychological stress and the human immune system: a meta-analytic
study of 30 years of inquiry. Psychol. Bull. 130:601–30
The most
comprehensive review
of the relationship
between stress and the
immune system.
Segerstrom SC, O’Connor DB. 2012. Stress, health and illness: four challenges for the future. Psychol. Health
27:128–40
Selye H. 1936. A syndrome produced by diverse nocuous agents. Nature 138(3479):32
Selye H. 1950. Stress and the general adaptation syndrome. BMJ 1:1383–92
Selye H. 1951. The general-adaptation-syndrome. Annu. Rev. Med. 2:327–42
Slavich GM. 2019. Stressnology: the primitive (and problematic) study of life stress exposure and pressing
need for better measurement. Brain Behav. Immun. 75:3–5
Snyder-Mackler N, Sanz J, Kohn JN, Brinkworth JF, Morrow S, et al. 2016. Social status alters immune regulation and response to infection in macaques. Science 354(6315):1041–45
Stalder T, Kirschbaum C, Kudielka BM, Adam EK, Pruessner JC, et al. 2016. Assessment of the cortisol
awakening response: expert consensus guidelines. Psychoneuroendocrinology 63:414–32
Stalder T, Steudte-Schmiedgen S, Alexander N, Klucken T, Vater A, et al. 2017. Stress-related and basic
determinants of hair cortisol in humans: a meta-analysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology 77:261–74
Steptoe A, Hamer M, Lin J, Blackburn EH, Erusalimsky JD. 2017. The longitudinal relationship between
cortisol responses to mental stress and leukocyte telomere attrition. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 102:962–
69
Steptoe A, Serwinski B. 2016. Cortisol awakening response. In Stress: Concepts, Cognition, Emotion, and Behavior,
ed. G Fink, pp. 277–83. London: Academic
Sterling P, Eyer J. 1988. Allostasis: a new paradigm to explain arousal pathology. In Handbook of Life Stress,
Cognition and Health, ed. S Fisher, J Reason, pp. 629–49. New York: Wiley
Thayer JF, Lane RD. 2007. The role of vagal function in the risk for cardiovascular disease and mortality. Biol.
Psychol. 74:224–42
Thayer JF, Yamamoto SS, Brosschot JF. 2010. The relationship of autonomic imbalance, heart rate
variability and cardiovascular disease risk factors. Int. J. Cardiol. 141:122–31
Key review linking
autonomic nervous
system imbalance to
health outcomes.
www.annualreviews.org • Stress and Health 687
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 178.86.4.113 On: Fri, 01 Nov 2024 16:20:56
Thorn L, Hucklebridge F, Evans P, Clow A. 2006. Suspected nonadherence and weekend versus week day
differences in the awakening cortisol response. Psychoneuroendocrinology 31:1009–18
Thrasher TN. 2006. Arterial baroreceptor input contributes to long-term control of blood pressure. Curr.
Hypertens. Rep. 8:249–54
Tomfohr L, Cooper DC, Mills PJ, Nelesen RA, Dimsdale JE. 2010. Everyday discrimination and nocturnal
blood pressure dipping in black and white Americans. Psychosom. Med. 72:266
Tomiyama AJ. 2019. Stress and obesity. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 70:703–18
Turner-Cobb JM, Rixon L, Jessop DS. 2011. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity and upper respiratory tract infection in young children transitioning to primary school. Psychopharmacology 214:309–17
UK Health Saf. Executive. 2019. Work Related Stress, Anxiety and Depression Statistics in Great Britain 2019.
London: Crown
Vedhara K, Ayling K, Sunger K, Caldwell D, Halliday V, et al. 2019. Psychological interventions as vaccine
adjuvants: a systematic review. Vaccine 37:3255–66
Vedhara K, Cox NK, Wilcock GK, Perks P, Hunt M, et al. 1999a. Chronic stress in elderly carers of dementia
patients and antibody response to influenza vaccination. Lancet 353:627–31
Vedhara K, Fox J, Wang E. 1999b. The measurement of stress-related immune dysfunction in psychoneuroimmunology. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 23:699–715
Vedhara K, Tuinstra J, Miles JNV, Sanderman R, Ranchor AV. 2006. Psychosocial factors associated with
indices of cortisol production in women with breast cancer and controls. Psychoneuroendocrinology 31:299–
311
Waehrer GM, Miller TR, Silverio Marques SC, Oh DL, Burke Harris N. 2020. Disease burden of adverse
childhood experiences across 14 states. PLOS ONE 15:e0226134
Wright KD, Hickman R, Laudenslager ML. 2015. Hair cortisol analysis: a promising biomarker of HPA
activation in older adults. Gerontologist 55:S140–45
Wust S, Federenko I, Hellhammer DH, Kirschbaum C. 2000. Genetic factors, perceived chronic stress and
the free cortisol response to awakening. Psychoneuroendocrinology 25:707–20
Zorn JV, Schur RR, Boks MP, Kahn RS, Joels M, Vinkers CH. 2017. Cortisol stress reactivity across psychiatric
disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology 77:25–36